# Player Characters #

Each player in a FReePG game will need at least one character to use in 
the game. FReePG has no concept of race or class within the game rules, 
but that doesn't mean a character doesn't have these things. A player 
character can be absolutely any kind of creature the player can imagine; 
race and class are used to enhance the story rather than affect the 
rules of the game.

## Creating a Character ##

Make sure each player has an index card, pencil and access to a 20-sided 
die. Ask the players to take a moment to think about what kind of 
creature their character is. What do they look like? Are they a barbaric 
fighter with a shaggy beard and a deadly short sword in each hand, an 
agile assassin with dagger and crossbow, or a friendly wizard who uses 
their deadly spells to protect the realm? The only think that matters is 
that its a character the player wants to play. Have each player write 
the name of the character along the top of the index card and a short 
description of the character on the line below.

![Sample Completed Character Card](Sample-Character-Card.png)

### Base Speed ###

Each character starts off with a base speed of 5, which means that they 
can move 5 squares on their turn (see the [Movement](#movement) chapter 
for more information on moving around.)

Some players may imagine a winged character that can fly; rather than 
create special rules for different characters, assume that *all* 
characters have access to flight capabilities either because of the type 
of creature they are or because of some magical (or technological) 
enhancement. All characters have a base fly speed of 3 (again, the 
[Movement](#movement) chapter has more information.)

Have each player write the following on their character card:

    Speed: 5
    Fly:   3

### Health Points ###

Each character starts out with a certain number of health points that 
represent the character's ability to sustain wounds in the game. During 
combat or when failing a dangerous skill check characters will lose 
health points. Characters can find health potions in the game that will 
heal their wounds (see the [Loot](#loot) chapter), and other characters 
can use an action to heal another character or themselves (see [Player 
Skills](#player-skills) below.)

All characters start out with a base of 50 health points plus a health 
bonus. To calculate the bonus, roll a 20-sided die and divide the result 
by 2. Round the result down to the nearest whole number (thus a roll of 
1 results in no bonus while a roll of 20 results in a 10-point bonus).

Have each player calculate their health points and write the number on 
their character card, for example:

    Max Health: 62

See the section on [Character Death](#character-death) to find out what 
happens when a character loses all of their health points.

### Skill Bonus ###

Each player picks something that their character is really good at, and 
the character gets a single +5 bonus to any skill of their choice. See 
the section on [Player Skills](#player-skills) for information on 
choosing skills. Have the player write this skill bonus on their 
character card, e.g.:

    Jumping Really Far: +5
