# Combat #

FReePG uses a simple combat system designed to be both easy and fun. 
When one creature attacks another creature, simply use the following 
formula to determine if the attack succeeds and how much damage the 
target or targets suffer:

1. The attacking character and each defending creature rolls a d20.

2. If the attacker rolls a natural 1, it is an automatic failure. STOP 
   HERE.

3. If the attacker rolls a natural 20, it is an automatic success, and 
   the attacker receives a +5 bonus to the damage dealt by the attack.

4. Apply any untyped die roll bonuses to each creature's roll.

5. Apply any attack or defense bonuses or penalties to the rolls of all 
   creatures and characters involved.

6. For each square farther away than adjacent that the target square is 
   from the attacker, subtract 1 from the attack score.

7. Each creature in the area affected by the attack is considered hit if 
   the effective attack score is greater than that creature's effective 
   defense score (or if the attacker rolled a natural 20).

8. Apply any damage bonuses or penalties to the attack score (including 
   the critical hit bonus if the attacker rolled a natural 20) to get 
   the damage score.

9. Apply any armor bonuses or penalties to the targets' defense scores.

10. Measure the radius of the affected area of the attack in squares. 
    For each square beyond 1, apply a -1 penalty to the damage score.

11. For each target that was hit by the attack, the damage it takes is 
    equal to the damage score minus its defense score.

An attack can consist of basically anything a player wants, 
and---outside of special items that apply specific bonuses (see [Bonus 
Sources](#bonus-sources))---it doesn't much matter if the character is 
using a weapon they've not had before or suddenly casting a magic spell. 
The nature of the attack is pure flavor for the story; the mechanics for 
all attacks are identical.

Assuming that a character has no items that provide situational bonuses 
to area effect spells, ranged weapon attacks, etc. a character is most 
likely to hit and damage another creature with an attack on a single 
adjacent square. The further away the target square or the bigger the 
area of effect, the less chance there is that the attack will hit or 
deal significant damage to the target.

## Ranged Attacks ##

A ranged attack is any attack that targets a square not adjacent to the 
creature making the attack. As stated above, an attack penalty is always 
applied to ranged attacks (unless the attacker scores a critical hit). 
The amount of the penalty grows by -1 for each square further away the 
target is.

In addition to the range penalty, a ranged attack cannot be made against 
a square to which the attacker does not have line of sight. The attacker 
has line of sight to a square if you can draw a straight line between 
the center of the attacker's square and the center of the target square 
without that line passing through any obstacles or other creatures. Keep 
in mind that differences in elevation may affect whether or not an 
obstacle is blocking line of sight.

## Area Attacks ##

Area attacks are always centered on an origin square and grow evenly out 
from that square in all directions (although a square must have "line of 
sight" to the origin square to be affected). An area attack targets 
every creature within one of the affected squares, regardless of whether 
they are enemies or allies, *except* for the attacker. This means that 
the attacker could choose to make their square the origin square without 
being hit by their own attack.

## Bonus Sources ##

Bonuses to attack, defense, damage and armor scores are gained through 
the use of enhanced items (the nature of the enhancement could be 
magical or technological depending on the game's genre). These items can 
be found when looting a room during an encounter or purchased in town 
(see the [Loot](#loot) chapter). An item must be equipped in order to 
gain the benefits it provides. These bonuses are applied in addition to 
any untyped die roll bonuses that a character may have at that time.

### Attack Bonuses ###

Attack bonuses are gained through the use of enhanced weapons such as 
swords, bows, bombs, staffs and wands. A weapon can provide a maximum 
attack bonus of +5, although it may have other utility powers as well. A 
weapon must be used in the attack in order to benefit from its attack 
bonus.

### Damage Bonuses ###

Damage bonuses are gained through the use of enhanced items worn on the 
arms or hands of the attacker. A character can wear a maximum of two 
rings, and one hand item. Each item can have a maximum damage bonus of 
+2.

### Defense Bonuses ###

Defense bonuses are gained through the use of enhanced items worn on the 
head (helmets, crowns, etc.) or pendants. A character can equip at most 
one head item and one pendant. Each item can have a maximum defense 
bonus of +2.

### Armor Bonuses ###

Armor bonuses are gained through the use of...you guessed it...enhanced 
armor. Enhanced armor can provide a maximum of a +5 armor bonus.
