# Loot #

As the characters explore encounter areas and defeat enemies, each one 
will acquire loot consisting of treasure (items that are worth money but 
provide no bonuses) and enhanced items that aid in combat or have other 
beneficial effects. Sometimes an enhanced item will both provide a 
benefit and incur a penalty.

## Item Enhancements ##

Items found as loot or purchased in town can have an enhancement bonus. 
These bonuses most commonly affect combat by providing an attack, 
damage, defense or armor bonus. Other items might provide a skill bonus 
or a speed bonus. The maximum enhancement bonus on an item is +5.

Each character has a number of "slots" where enhanced items can be 
equipped:

Head Slot
  : Helmets, crowns, visors, masks, etc.

  : Provides bonus to knowledge and/or perception skill checks

Neck Slot
  : Pendants, collars, capes, etc.

  : Provides a defense bonus (see [Combat](#combat).

Armor Slot
  : Pretty much any type of armor or clothing that the character is
    wearing.

  : Provides a character's armor bonus (see [Combat](#combat)).

Hands/Arms Slot
  : Gauntlets, gloves, rings, etc.

  : Provides a damage bonus (see [Combat](#combat))

Belt Slot
  : Belts, sashes, etc.

  : Provides a bonus to physical skill checks

Feet Slot
  : Shoes, boots, sandals, etc.

  : Provides a bonus to walking or flying speed and/or a bonus to
    stealth or acrobatics skill checks.

Weapon Slot
  : Anything that can be used during a characters turn to inflict damage
    on an enemy.

  : Provides a bonus to attack rolls

Each slot can have only one item equipped, although the character could 
have any number of items in their possession. Only equipped items 
provide a bonus. With the exception of swapping weapons, swapping one 
item for another requires the use of one of the character's actions (a 
*Mundane Action*) on their turn. (See [Basic Order of 
Play](#basic-order-of-play) in the [Introduction](#introduction) chapter 
for more information on turn actions.)

## Going to Town ##

In addition to finding enhanced items while looting encounter areas, 
characters can got to "town" (you may wish to call it something else 
depending on your game's genre) to purchase enhanced items and healing 
potions. The greater the bonus provided by an item, the more it will 
cost, and items can be sold or traded for half of their purchase price. 
(Characters are free to trade amongst themselves without regard to the 
trade values specified below.)

Table: Purchase and Sale Value of Items

       Item Bonus     Purchase Price      Sale/Trade Value
-----------------   ----------------    ------------------
Restore 10 health              20 gp                 10 gp
               +1             200 gp                100 gp
               +2             600 gp                300 gp
               +3            1200 gp                600 gp
               +4            2000 gp               1000 gp
               +5            3000 gp               1500 gp

A character can visit town by standing on any portal square (see 
[Terrain Features](#terrain-features)) and spending a movement square. 
No purchases, trades or sales can be made until the beginning of that 
character's next turn, and he character can not return from town until 
their next turn. The return trip will also cost them one square of 
movement, but they may return to any portal square the party has 
discovered.

Enemy character usually won't use a portal square, however, if a 
character goes to town and an enemy reaches the portal square before the 
beginning of that character's next turn, the enemy is able to follow the 
character to town. If this happens, characters will be unable to 
purchase or sell items in town for 20 rounds (presumably because the 
enemy attacks the town and scares of the merchants.)
