# Building Encounters #

As players explore the environment, it is up to the GM to build each 
encounter area. There are two ways to approach building encounters for 
your game; either plan them in advance or simply generate each area as 
you play the game. The former is well-suited to games where the GM has a 
specific story-arc in mind, because it allows you to think in advance 
about where to place specific items and enemies that your players will 
need to find in order to meet their objectives in the adventure. The 
latter is great for games where you don't have time to plan and the 
characters' objective is simply to explore an area, defeat enemies and 
accumulate loot.

Preplanning an adventure is similar to generating an ad-hoc adventure, 
except that you need to create your battle maps ahead of time and keep 
notes about what the characters will find in each encounter area. In 
addition to using the random encounter area tables to select loot, 
terrain features and enemy groups, you will want to think about the 
overall story of the adventure and create a rough time line of the 
events that the enemies will cause to happen if left unchecked by the 
characters' actions.

When playing an ad-hoc adventure, you don't need to draw all of your 
maps ahead of time. Simply design each encounter area as you go and use 
the random encounter tables to flesh out each area.

## Generating an Encounter Area ##

Whether you are preplanning an adventure or playing ad-hoc, the 
following steps will help you design the encounter area.

1. Make a d20 roll and find the corresponding terrain features from the 
   *Random Terrain Features* table. You should incorporate these terrain 
   features into your encounter area. (See the [Terrain 
   Features](#terrain-features) section of the [Movement](#movement) 
   chapter for more details on what these mean.)

2. Make one d20 roll for every 4 player characters. For each roll, find 
   the corresponding enemy groups in the *Random Enemy Groups* table, 
   and place these in the encounter area. If your terrain features 
   include any traps, be sure to remove the appropriate enemies from 
   your encounter group.

3. Use the *Enemy Group Alertness* table to determine how easy it will 
   be for the characters to detect and/or sneak up on each enemy group 
   in the encounter area.

3. Make one d20 roll for each enemy group that you placed in the 
   encounter area and find the corresponding entries in the *Random 
   Loot* table. Place the loot in the encounter area.

    * If the encounter area contains no enemies, roll a d20, and on a 
      score of 11-20 roll for one loot item and place it in the 
      encounter area. On a roll of 14-16, hide the loot behind a secret 
      door with a Hard DT, and on a roll of 17-20 picking up the loot 
      will trigger a medium, single-fire trap.

4. Draw or otherwise create the encounter area on your battle map and be 
   sure to incorporate any terrain features that the characters would 
   notice upon entering the area.

5. Place enemy tokens on the battle map for any enemies that are not 
   successfully hiding from the characters.

6. Roll a d20. On a roll of 10 or higher, the encounter area contains a 
   portal square (see [Terrain Features](#terrain-features)).


## Enemies ##

Just like characters, there are no predefined enemy races or classes in 
FReePG; this is the GM's opportunity to use their imagination when 
coming up with descriptions for the enemies and what each enemy uses 
when it attacks. The same rules of combat apply to enemies as to player 
characters; see the [Combat](#combat) chapter for more information.

Enemies may have a flat bonus of +1, +2 or +3 that applies to their 
attack rolls, defense rolls, walking speed and flying speed. Unlike 
player characters, enemies do not regain health points during combat, 
and they cannot be resurrected after they die.

Enemies come in four different configurations: minions, small, medium 
and large. The stats for each type of enemy are presented below.

### Minions ###

Minions are useful for filling out larger encounter areas and providing 
a more "epic" battle scene. The GM can elect to replace one or more of 
the small, medium or large enemies in an encounter with minions. A small 
enemy is replaced with 4 minions, a medium enemy is replaced with 6 
minions, and a large enemy is replaced with 8 minions. Any bonuses that 
would apply to the replaced enemy will apply to each of the minions.

    Health Points: 1

    Size on Battle Map: 1x1

    Speed: 5
    Fly: 3

### Small Enemies ###

    Health Points: 20

    Size on Battle Map: 1x1

    Speed: 5
    Fly:   3

### Medium Enemies ###

  Health Points: 30

  Size on Battle Map: 2x2

  Speed: 5
  Fly:   3

### Large Enemies ###

  Health Points: 40

  Size on Battle Map: 4x4

  Speed: 5
  Fly:   3

## Traps ##

Traps are similar to enemies, because they also attack and damage 
characters who trigger them. As such, placing a trap in an encounter 
area replaces one enemy creature in the encounter.

Traps can be either single-fire or continuous. A single fire trap 
attacks once when it is triggered and gets a +5 bonus to its damage 
score. A continuous trap attacks once when it is triggered, and it 
attacks once per round on the GM's turn.

Depending on whether the trap replaces a small, medium or large 
creature, it will have different difficulty targets for detection and 
disabling.

Small Trap
  : dt-12 to detect, dt-12 to disable

Medium Trap
  : dt-15 to detect, dt-15 to disable

Large Trap
  : dt-17 to detect, dt-17 to disable

A continuous trap may not attack every round. For instance, if the 
characters trigger a trap that makes the ceiling and floor start to move 
toward each other, the trap will not actually *attack* the characters 
until the two surfaces are close enough to crush the characters. Such a 
trap receives a +2 attack bonus for each turn that it acts without 
attacking the characters. If it takes five rounds for the ceiling to 
begin crushing the players, it would have accumulated a +10 attack 
bonus.

A traps attacks are treated as if the trap were making a normal attack 
as an enemy in the square that triggered the trap. All the same rules 
for range and area attacks apply. In the crushing-ceiling example, this
means that the attack would get sread over the area of the entire room 
(assuming the entire ceiling and/or floor were moving.

Table: Random Terrain Features

  Die Roll  Terrain Features
----------  ------------------------------------------------------------
         1  multiple exits (in addition to the way the characters came)
         2  difficult terrain
         3  locked door (Average dt)
         4  locked door (Hard dt)
         5  locker door (Very Hard dt)
         6  barred door (Average dt)
         7  barred door (Hard dt)
         8  barred door (Very Hard dt)
         9  secret/hidden door (Average dt)
        10  secret/hidden door (Hard dt)
        11  secret/hidden door (Very Hard dt)
        12  single-fire trap
        13  continuous trap
        14  power amplifier
        15  power drain
        16  air current
        17  water current
        18  obstacles
        19  obstacles, water current
        20  obstacles, air current

Table: Random Enemy Groups

  Die Roll  Enemy Group
----------  ------------------------------------------------------------
         1  4 small enemies
         2  2 medium enemies
         3  1 large enemy
         4  4 small enemies; +1 bonus
         5  2 medium enemies; +1 bonus
         6  1 large enemy; +1 bonus
         7  4 small enemies; +2 bonus
         8  2 medium enemies; +2 bonus
         9  1 large enemy; +2 bonus
        10  4 small enemies; +3 bonus
        11  2 medium enemies; +3 bonus
        12  1 large enemy; +3 bonus
        13  4 small enemies, 1 medium enemy
        14  1 small enemy, 2 medium enemies
        15  2 small enemies, 1 large enemy
        16  4 small enemies, 1 medium enemy; +1 bonus
        17  1 small enemy, 2 medium enemies; +1 bonus
        18  2 small enemies, 1 large enemy; +1 bonus
        19  4 small enemies, 1 medium enemy; +2 bonus
        20  No enemies

Table: Enemy Group Alertness

------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Die Roll  Enemy Alertness
----------  ------------------------------------------------------------
       1-5  Enemies are actively hiding (roll is bonus to sneak skill)

      6-10  Enemies are relaxed (roll -5 is penalty to detect
            characters))

     11-20  Enemies are alert but not hiding (no bonuses or penalties
            applied to enemies)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table: Random Loot Table

  Die Roll  Loot Description
----------  ------------------------------------------------------------
         1  Nothing, nada, zilch!
         2  100 gp
         3  50 gp, 2 healing potions
         4  100 gp, 1 healing potion
         5  1 item with a +1 enhancement
         6  200 gp
         7  100 gp, 4 healing potions
         8  200 gp, 2 healing potions
         9  1 item with a +1 enhancement
        10  1 item with a +2 enhancement
        11  400 gp
        12  200 gp, 4 healing potions
        13  1 item with a +2 enhancement
        14  2 items with a +1 enhancement
        15  1 item with a +3 enhancement
        16  1 item with a +1 enhancement
        17  1 item with a +1 enhancement, 2 healing potions
        18  2 items with a +2 enhancement, 200 gp
        19  1 item with a +4 enhancement
        20  1 item with a +5 enhancement
