## The Core Mechanic ##

When role-playing using the FReePG system, players are encouraged to use 
their imaginations and are free to have their character do *absolutely 
anything* the player can imagine. As long as everyone is enjoying the 
story and having fun, who cares if Jimmy the half-elf fighter who has 
always just used his sword suddenly unleashes a magic spell that takes 
down a skeletal horde? The goal is to tell a story and have fun, not to 
spend 10 minutes arguing about whether it makes sense. Just encourage 
your players to describe how the character is able to perform an action 
and then let them try it. The less often you say "no", the more fun 
everyone will have.

In many cases, you can just let the players do the thing they want to 
do, but in some cases---such as fighting an enemy or trying to scale a 
high wall---the rules of the game will come into play. Whenever a player 
attempts an action that the GM feels should have some chance of failure, 
the player must roll a 20-sided die. If the action would have a negative 
effect on another character (whether a player character or a non-player 
character), this will be done as an *opposed roll*, otherwise it is done 
as a *skill check* roll.

Regardless of the type of roll involved, a natural roll (the number on 
the die before any bonus or penalty is applied) of 1 *always* fails, and 
a natural roll of 20 *always* succeeds.

### Opposed Rolls ###

When a character attempts an action that will have a negative effect on 
another character in the game, the target character will also roll a 
20-sided die. If the player's roll is higher than the target's roll, the 
player character succeeds at the action. (See the [Combat](#combat) 
chapter for resolving actions that would deal damage to the target.)

For example, if Jane wants to have her character sneak around the group 
of trolls while they are sitting around their stew pot, Jane would roll a 
d20 and the GM would roll a d20 once for each troll in the group. If 
Jane's roll is higher than each of the GM's rolls, then her character 
successfully sneaks around the trolls. However, if any one of the GM's 
rolls is higher than Jane's, then the trolls notice her character.

### Skill Check Rolls ###

If a player wishes their character to perform an action at which the GM 
feels the character might not succeed, the GM will pick a *difficulty 
target* from the table below and ask the player for a d20 roll. If the 
character rolls a number equal to or greater than the difficulty target, 
they succeed.

#### Difficulty Targets ####

Table: Difficulty Targets for Skill Check Rolls

  Target  Description
--------  ------------------
     1-7  Easy
    8-12  Average
   13-16  Hard
   17-20  Very Hard

Easy difficulty
  : Most people would pretty much always succeed at this, so unless the
    character has some type of penalty being applied, it might not be 
    worth having them roll at all.

Average difficulty
  : An action of average difficulty could be achieved by most characters
    most of the time, but there is always a chance they might fail.

Hard difficulty
  : An action with a hard difficulty will sometimes succeed, but it
    takes a heroic effort.

Very Hard difficulty
  : An action with a very hard difficulty is almost impossible and takes
    a bit of luck in addition to heroic effort.

If the GM feels that failing at the attempted action is something that 
might physically harm the character, the character will take damage 
equal to the difficulty target minus their die roll.

If John tells the GM that his character, Boffin the Bold, is going to 
climb the wall of Castle Looserock, the GM will set the difficulty 
target and ask for a d20 skill check roll. Since the castle lives up to 
its name and has unstable walls, the GM sets the difficulty target to 
14, which is in the range of Hard difficulty targets. If John rolls a 14 
or higher, then his character succeeds at climbing the wall. If John 
rolls, say, an 8, then his character fails to climb the wall. Because 
failing to climb a wall usually means falling (and because falling often 
hurts) Boffin the Bold will take damage equal to the difficulty target 
minus John's roll, i.e. `14 - 8 = 6` for 6 points of damage.

### Bonuses and Penalties ###

Various items throughout the game can either provide a bonus or enact a 
penalty on a player's roll. See the chapter on [Combat](#combat) to 
learn how weapons and armor affect combat rolls, the section on [Player 
Skills](#player-skills) in the [Player Characters](#player-characters) 
chapter to learn how non-combat actions can be affected, and the chapter 
on [Movement](#movement) to learn how bonuses and penalties are applied 
to movement during a player's turn.
