## Basic Order of Play ##

FReePG is easy to set up and run, all you need are the necessary 
[Materials](#materials) and at least two players (someone to play the 
characters and a Game Master to build the encounters). To start off, the 
players must agree on what type of adventure they wish to play, be it a 
dungeon crawl, infiltrating a wizard's tower, comic book style 
superheroes defending a city, modern spies gathering intelligence on 
enemy forces, or futuristic soldiers capturing an alien spacecraft; 
FReePG is up to the task of supporting all of these.

Once the type of game is decided, the GM should help each player create 
a character according to the rules in the [Player 
Characters](#player-characters) chapter. This should only take a few 
minutes.

When the characters are ready, the game can begin. Play happens in 
several phases:

1. The GM creates a new encounter area (see the [Building 
   Encounters](#building-encounters) chapter).

2. The characters defeat any enemies in the encounter area (see the 
   [Combat](#combat) chapter).

3. The characters explore their surroundings, find clues, loot the room 
   (see the [Loot](#loot) chapter) and decide where to go next. Play 
   starts over at phase 1 when the characters decide to enter the next 
   encounter area.

### Taking Turns ###

During the combat and exploration phases of the game, play takes place 
in rounds with each character taking one turn per round. To give the 
game a sense of time, a single combat round takes about 6 seconds of 
in-game time (regardless of how much time it takes to resolve in the 
real world), and each non-combat/exploration round is 1 minute of 
in-game time.

At the beginning of each encounter (before the characters enter the new 
encounter area) each player and the GM will roll a d20. The player with 
the highest score goes first, and then play continues in a clockwise 
direction around the table. If the GM has any non-player characters to 
control in the encounter area (whether enemies or allies) they all act 
on the GM's turn. If the GM controls both some allies and some enemies, 
the allies act first.

During their turn, each player is allowed to take two actions, and each 
of those actions can be one of the following types:

Move
  : The character moves up to their effective speed for the type of
    movement. See the [Movement](#movement) chapter for details.

Skill Check
  : The character can perform a skill check to perform any action that
    is not considered movement and that has a chance of failure.

Attack
  : The character attacks another creature. **Special:** this action can
    be used only once per turn unless the character has a specific bonus 
    that grants an exception.

Mundane Actions
  : If it's not a move, and it doesn't require a skill check, but it
    does have a tangible effect on the game world, it's a mundane 
    action. The GM can use their judgment to determine how much of what 
    a character wants to do could happen in a single turn, but keep in 
    mind that this is one action in either a 6-second combat round or a 
    one-minute exploration round.

Free Actions
  : **Special:** a character can speak a few sentences or swap weapons
    once during their turn without expending one of their actions. 
    Characters can also speak back in reply to other characters when it 
    is not their turn as long as the dialog would reasonably fit within 
    the round (although don't penalize good roll-playing by enforcing 
    this rule too much; its just intended to keep the game moving).

Although players resolve their turns sequentially, we assume that all of 
these actions take place more-or-less simultaneously in the game world.
