## Character Death ##

When a character loses all of their health points, they are unconscious 
and dying, and they cannot take any actions on their turn. If one full 
round of play passes (every other player character has finished their 
turn since the character started dying) and the character has not been 
healed to greater than 0 health points, the character is dead.

But hey, death isn't very fun, right? Don't worry, all is not lost. When 
a character dies, they are resurrected at the nearest portal (see the 
[Terrain Features](#terrain-features) section of the 
[Movement](#movement) chapter for more information on portals) or, if no 
portals have yet been discovered, at the starting point of the 
adventure.

The resurrected character starts out without any of their equipment or 
treasure, but they can get their treasure back by returning to the 
square where they died. Depending on the number of turns it takes for 
them to return to that square, some of their items will have been 
carried off by scavengers. Consult the table below to determine how much 
of their items (by value, see the [Loot](#loot) chapter for information 
on item values) can be regained.

Table: Percentage of Loot Reclaimed after Resurrection

  Number of Turns     Percentage of Loot by Value
-----------------   -----------------------------
              0-1                            100%
                2                             75%
                3                             50%
                4                             25%
                5                            None

If the character regains less than 100% of their loot, it is up to the 
player which items to keep and which must be discarded. The percentage 
is a maximum. Say a character has two items worth 50 gp each and an item 
worth 200 gp when they die. If it takes them 3 turns to get to the 
square where the character died, they can only keep a maximum of 50% of 
their loot. The character would have to keep the two 50 gp items and 
discard the 200 gp item.
